.TH PLAN9RC 8
.SH NAME
plan9rc, ramskel, initskel \- rootless boot scripts
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B plan9rc
.br
.B ramskel
.br
.B initskel
.SH DESCRIPTION
After the kernel boots, it execs
.B /boot
(see
.IR root (3)),
which in turn execs
.BR plan9rc .
.IR plan9rc (8)
reads the
.B $service
environment variable
.B cpu
or
.BR terminal ,
and then proceeds as an
.B rc
script to bring the system up.
.PP
.SH Startup Procedures
The script operates according to the variables found in the environment,
usually those provided by
.IR plan9.ini (8)
It proceeds in the order of 
.TP 8
.BR factotum
is started in either cpu or terminal mode according to the user's choice.
.TP
.B USB boot check
finds out if the system is booting to a usb volume and starts
.IR partfs (8)
if so
.TP
.B ramfs setup
is done from /boot/skel.tar and may also make use of 9fat/tools.tgz
.TP 
.B system environment check
is made to verify that a user/hostowner and system name are in place
.TP
.B venti startup
will begin a 
.IR venti (8)
server if specified by the venti environment variable.
.TP
.B connect to a root fs
will either begin a disk fileserver or dial a tcp root fileserver
.TP
.B setup a rootless control environment
runs the initskel script to create a self-sufficient environment to
.IR cpu (1)
into for service and administrative access to the layer below the root filesystem.
.TP
.B launch root environment
will begin either the
.IR cpurc (8)
or
.IR termrc (8)
from the rootfs. These scripts are launched using
.IR newns (8)
to create a normal user environment independent of the namespace of plan9rc.
.TP
.B return to the early kernel namespace or stay in the ram/paq root namespace
allows the user to retain access if desired to the programs in the bootpaq and/or tools.tgz.
.SH VARIABLES
The plan9rc script makes use of standard variables from
.IR plan9.ini (8)
and also new variables. Both types of variables, and their default behaviors, are listed.
.TP 8
.BR interactive
determines the mode of operation for plan9rc. By default, or if set to traditional, it will behave towards the user almost identically to the original plan9 bootup, but will still set up the rootless environment. If set to [yes] then the user will be prompted interactively through the boot process and given the option to alter any and all plan9.ini variable settings. If set to [no] the user will not be prompted at all and the boot process proceeds in automated fashion according to the environment variables.
.TP
.B bootargs
determines the method for connecting to a root fs. tcp [internet config parameters] or local![path to disk root fs] are the standard values here.
.TP
.B factotum
type of factotum [cpu terminal debug]
.TP
.B sysname
standard sysname definition
.TP
.B fs
standard fs address from plan9.ini, needed for tcp booting
.TP
.B auth
standard auth address for tcp booting
.TP
.B venti
standard venti address variable from plan9.ini
.TP
.B fossil
location of fossil partition on disk
.TP
.B cfs
location of cfs partition on disk
.TP
.B ramsetup
program to set up ramfs for bootscripts, defaults to [ramskel]
.TP
.B initscript
miniature cpurc equivalent script for the ramroot namespaces, defaults to [initskel]
.TP
.B startventi
set to yes to start the venti server [yes]. This will be automatically set to yes if a venti variable is found beginning with #S which implies venti should be started from the local disk.
.TP
.B getrootfs
this is a derivative variable from bootargs, determined from bootparse or set by user during interactive [tcp local]
.TP
.B namespace
namespace for starting initscript, defaults to [namespace]
.TP
.B rootstart
whether or not to start cpurc or termrc scripts from mounted root [cpu terminal]
.TP
.B staylocal
whether to stay within the namespace of the plan9rc script on the console, set "no" to drop back to only kernel devices [yes]
.TP
.B afterfact
command to execute after starting factotum (happens before everything else), not used by default
.TP
.B afterroot
command to execute after mounting rootfs but before initscript or cpu or termrc, not used by default
.SS Initskel and ramskel variables
Variables for the other two scripts used by rootless bootup are also described here. Their meaning and default values are as follows.
.TP
.BR tgzfs
name of optional .tgz to load into the ramdisk. I provide a recommended tools.tgz but this value is not set by default. This value is used by ramskel. The rest are all for initskel.
.TP
.B binddevs
by default initskel binds the devices ( f t m v L P u U '$' Σ κ ). Set this to no to disable this.
.TP
.B hostfactotum
by default the ramroot namespace makes use of the system wide factotum. Set this to no to enable running a private factotum for this namespace. You will be prompted for the values to set for the factotum key.
.TP
.B netsvc
by default initskel will issue an ipconfig command if internet service has not already been started. Set no to disable this.
.TP
.B hostcsnds
by default the factotum in the ramroot environment will use the host system cs and dns for connection information. Set no to disable this.
.TP
.B cpusvc
by default initskel will start a cpu listener and an rx listener. Set no to disable this.
.TP
.B cpuport
this sets the numeric port used for the cpu listener. It is set to [17020] by default to avoid conflict with the host system cpu listener.
.TP
.B hubsvc
by default a hubfs server is started and an rc connected to it. Set no to disable this.
.TP
.B unprivileged
by default the ramroot environment does not provide auth services. Set no to start a keyfs and authsrv using 9fat/adm.
.SH FILES
.TF /boot/plan9rc
.TP
.B /boot/plan9rc
bootup and namespace launching control script
.TP
.B /boot/ramskel
sets up /boot/skel.tar as a ramfs skeleton along with an option tools.tgz from 9fat
.TP
.B /boot/initskel
.IR cpurc (8)
analog script for access to the rootless environment
.SH SOURCE
.B sources/contrib/mycroftiv/rootlessnext/bootdir.extras
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.IR srv (4),
.IR namespace (6),
.IR boot (8),
.IR listen (8)
